../../../bookCovers/journey.png
Bestseller
Louis-Ferdinand Céline
85
Here’s how it started. I’d never said a word. Not one word. It was Arthur Ganate that made me speak up. Arthur was a friend from med school. So we meet on the Place Clichy. It was after breakfast. He wants to talk to me. I listen. “Not out here,” he says. “Let’s go in.” We go in. And there we were. “This terrace,” he says, “is for jerks. Come on over there.” Then we see that there’s not a soul in the street, because of the heat; no cars, nothing. Same when it’s very cold, not a soul in the street; I remember now, it was him who had said one time: “The people in Paris always look busy, when all they actually do is roam around from morning to night; it’s obvious, because when the weather isn’t right for walking around, when it’s too cold or too hot, you don’t see them anymore; they’re all indoors, drinking their cafés crèmes or their beers. And that’s the truth. The century of speed! they call it. Where? Great changes! they say. For instance? Nothing has changed. They go on admiring themselves, that’s all. And that’s not new either. Words. Even the words haven’t changed much. Two or three little ones, here and there …” Pleased at having proclaimed these useful truths, we sat looking at the ladies in the café.
After a while the conversation turned to President Poincaré, who was due to inaugurate a puppy show that same morning, and that led to Le Temps, where I’d read about it. Arthur Banate starts kidding me about Le Temps. “What a paper!” he says. “When it comes to defending the French race, it hasn’t its equal.” And quick to show I’m well informed, I fire back: “The French race can do with some defending, seeing it doesn’t exist.”

“Oh yes, it does!” he says. “And a fine race it is! the finest in the world, and anybody who says different is a yellow dog!” And he starts slanging me. Naturally I stuck to my guns.

“It’s not true! What you call a race is nothing but a collection of riffraff like me, bleary-eyed, flea-bitten, chilled to the bone. They came from the four corners of the earth, driven by hunger, plague, tumors, and the cold, and stopped here. They couldn’t go any further because of the ocean. That’s France, that’s the French people.”

“Bardamu,” he says very gravely and a bit sadly. “Our forefathers were as good as we are, don’t speak ill of them! …”

“You’re right, Arthur, there you’re right! Hateful and spineless, raped and robbed, mangled and witless, they were as good as we are, you can say that again! We never change. Neither our socks nor our masters nor our opinions, or we’re so slow about it that it’s no use. We were born loyal, and that’s what killed us! Soldiers free of charge, heroes for everyone else, talking monkeys, tortured words, we are the minions of King Misery; He’s our lord and master! When we misbehave, he tightens his grip … his fingers are around our neck, that makes it hard to talk, got to be careful if we want to eat … For nothing at all he’ll choke you … It’s not a life …”

“There’s love, Bardamu!”

“Arthur,” I tell him, “love is the infinite placed within the reach of poodles. I have my dignity!”

“You do, do you? You’re an anarchist, that’s what you are!”

A wise guy, as you see, with only the most advanced opinions.